[merge after dec 5th] adds new hard_deletes config (#6558)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/snapshots.md

      [unique_key](/reference/resource-configs/unique_key): column_name_or_expression
      [check_cols](/reference/resource-configs/check_cols): [column_name] | all
      [updated_at](/reference/resource-configs/updated_at): column_name
      [snapshot_meta_column_names](/reference/resource-configs/snapshot_meta_column_names): dictionary
      [dbt_valid_to_current](/reference/resource-configs/dbt_valid_to_current): string

>       [hard_deletes](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes): string

Reviewer: i wonder if instead of saying "string" here, we should say something like `ignore | invalidate | new_record` so it's clear what your options are?

### Hard deletes (opt-in)

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9">

> In dbt v1.9 and higher, the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config replaces the `invalidate_hard_deletes` config to give you more control on how to handle deleted rows from the source. The `hard_deletes` config is not a separate strategy but an additional opt-in feature that can be used with any snapshot strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In dbt v1.9 and higher, the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config replaces the `invalidate_hard_deletes` config to give you more control on how to handle deleted rows from the source. The `hard_deletes` config is an additional opt-in feature that can be used with any snapshot strategy.
```

> The `hard_deletes` config has three options/fields:

Reviewer: maybe we call these "methods"?

| Field | Description |
| --------- | ----------- |
| `ignore` (default) | No action for deleted records. |

> | `invalidate` | Behaves the same as the existing `invalidate_hard_deletes=true`, where deleted records are invalidated by setting `dbt_valid_to`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `invalidate` | Behaves the same as the existing `invalidate_hard_deletes=true`, where deleted records are invalidated by setting `dbt_valid_to` to the current time. |
```

> | `new_record` | Tracks deleted records as new rows using the `dbt_is_deleted` [meta field](#snapshot-meta-fields) when records are deleted.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `new_record` | Tracks deleted records as new rows using the `dbt_is_deleted` [meta field](#snapshot-meta-fields) to indicate when records are in a deleted state.|
```

import HardDeletes from '/snippets/_hard-deletes.md';

<HardDeletes />

#### Example usage

<File name='snapshots/orders_snapshot.yml'>

```yaml
snapshots:
  - name: orders_snapshot_hard_delete
    relation: source('jaffle_shop', 'orders')
    config:
      schema: snapshots
      unique_key: id
      strategy: timestamp
      updated_at: updated_at

>       hard_deletes: new_record # options are: 'ignore', 'invalidate', or 'new_record'

Reviewer 2: Recommend two spaces prior to inline YAML comments:
```suggestion
      hard_deletes: new_record  # options are: 'ignore', 'invalidate', or 'new_record'
```

```

</File>

> In this example, the `hard_deletes: new_record` config will add a new row for deleted records woth the `dbt_is_deleted` column set to `True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `hard_deletes: new_record` config will add a new row for deleted records with the `dbt_is_deleted` column set to `True`.
```

> In this example, the `hard_deletes: new_record` config will add a new row for deleted records woth the `dbt_is_deleted` column set to `True`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `hard_deletes: new_record` config will add a new row for deleted records with the `dbt_is_deleted` column set to `True`.
```

> Any restored records are added as new rows with the `dbt_is_deleted` field set to `False`.

Reviewer: this is a great callout <3

The resulting table will look like this:

| id | status | updated_at | dbt_valid_from | dbt_valid_to | dbt_is_deleted |
| -- | ------ | ---------- | -------------- | ------------ | -------------- |
| 1  | pending | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | False          |
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:20 | False          |

> | 1  | deleted | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |                  | True           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |                  | True           |
```

Reviewer: since the only change is the record was deleted, it should be the same as the prior record (except now `dbt_is_deleted` is true)

> | 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |                  | True           |

Reviewer: This row should have a `dbt_valid_to` set to `2024-01-01 12:00` (the time that the "undeleted" record is now valid at)

Author: added:

| id | status | updated_at | dbt_valid_from | dbt_valid_to | dbt_is_deleted |
| -- | ------ | ---------- | -------------- | ------------ | -------------- |
| 1  | pending | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | False          |
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:20 | False          |
| 1  | deleted | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |    2024-01-01 12:00               | True           |
| 1  | restored | 2024-01-01 12:00 | 2024-01-01 12:00 |  | False        |

> | 1  | restored | 2024-01-01 12:00 | 2024-01-01 12:00 |                 | False          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 12:00 | 2024-01-01 12:00 |                 | False          |
```

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.8">

Rows that are deleted from the source query are not invalidated by default. With the config option `invalidate_hard_deletes`, dbt can track rows that no longer exist. This is done by left joining the snapshot table with the source table, and filtering the rows that are still valid at that point, but no longer can be found in the source table. `dbt_valid_to` will be set to the current snapshot time.

This configuration is not a different strategy as described above, but is an additional opt-in feature. It is not enabled by default since it alters the previous behavior.

For this configuration to work with the `timestamp` strategy, the configured `updated_at` column must be of timestamp type. Otherwise, queries will fail due to mixing data types.

> Note, in v1.9 and higher, the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config replaces the `invalidate_hard_deletes` config for better control over how to handle deleted rows from the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, in v1.9 and higher, setting the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config to `invalidate` replaces the `invalidate_hard_deletes` config for better control over how to handle deleted rows from the source.
```

</VersionBlock>

## Snapshot meta-fields

Snapshot <Term id="table">tables</Term> will be created as a clone of your source dataset, plus some additional meta-fields*.

Starting in 1.9 or with [dbt Cloud Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless):
- These column names can be customized to your team or organizational conventions using the [`snapshot_meta_column_names`](/reference/resource-configs/snapshot_meta_column_names) config. 
- Use the [`dbt_valid_to_current` config](/reference/resource-configs/dbt_valid_to_current) to set a custom indicator for the value of `dbt_valid_to` in current snapshot records (like a future date such as `9999-12-31`). By default, this value is `NULL`. When set, dbt will use this specified value instead of `NULL` for `dbt_valid_to` for current records in the snapshot table.

> - Use the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config to track deleted records as new rows with the `dbt_is_deleted` meta field when using the `hard_deletes='new_record'` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the [`hard_deletes`](/reference/resource-configs/hard-deletes) config and `new_record` method to track deleted records as new rows with the `dbt_is_deleted` meta field.
```

| Field          | Meaning | Usage |

> | -------------- | ------- | ----- | 

Reviewer 2: Looks like a trailing space accidentally sneaked in:

```suggestion
| -------------- | ------- | ----- |
```

| dbt_valid_from | The timestamp when this snapshot row was first inserted | This column can be used to order the different "versions" of a record. |
| dbt_valid_to   | The timestamp when this row became invalidated. <br /> For current records, this is `NULL` by default <VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9"> or the value specified in `dbt_valid_to_current`.</VersionBlock> | The most recent snapshot record will have `dbt_valid_to` set to `NULL` <VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9"> or the specified value. </VersionBlock> |
| dbt_scd_id     | A unique key generated for each snapshotted record. | This is used internally by dbt |
| dbt_updated_at | The updated_at timestamp of the source record when this snapshot row was inserted. | This is used internally by dbt |

> | dbt_is_deleted | A boolean value indicating if the record has been deleted. `True` if deleted, `False` otherwise. | Added when `hard_deletes='new_record'` is configured. This is used internally by dbt |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| dbt_is_deleted | A boolean value indicating if the record is in a deleted state. `True` if deleted, `False` otherwise. | Added when `hard_deletes='new_record'` is configured. |
```

| 1  | pending | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 10:47 |
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:05 |                  | 2024-01-01 11:05 |

Snapshot results with `hard_deletes='new_record'`:

| id | status  | updated_at       | dbt_valid_from   | dbt_valid_to     | dbt_updated_at   | dbt_is_deleted |
|----|---------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------|
| 1  | pending | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 10:47 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 10:47 | False          |
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:05 | False          |

> | 1  | deleted | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |              | 2024-01-01 11:20 | True           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1  | shipped | 2024-01-01 11:20 | 2024-01-01 11:20 |              | 2024-01-01 11:20 | True           |
```
